SHRIMP AND TASSO GUMBO

Associate Food Editor: Alexis Touchet
Father: Rodney Miller, Abbeville, LA

When I was a kid, our summer routine started with the opening day of
shrimp season — my dad would get the boat ready and out we would go,
winding our way down the bayou until we reached Vermilion Bay. He
would check to make sure the trawl net was securely tied before
tossing it into the water, and would then let it be dragged down
slowly along with the trawl boards. When we painstakingly pulled the
net up onto the boat and untied the bag, it spilled out a catch of
shrimp, crabs, and fish. These fresh shrimp were the stars in Dad's
favorite gumbo recipe.

2 lb large shrimp in shell (21 to 25 per lb), peeled and shells reserved
14 cups water
1/4 cup vegetable oil
1/2 cup all-purpose flour
2 medium onions, chopped
2 celery ribs, chopped
1 large green bell pepper, chopped
1/2 lb fresh or frozen pork tasso* (Cajun-cured smoked meat), thawed if frozen, trimmed and cut into 1/4-inch pieces
1 1/2 teaspoons salt
1/2 teaspoon cayenne
10 oz fresh or frozen baby okra, thawed if frozen, trimmed, and cut into 1/4-inch-thick rounds (2 cups)
3/4 cup thinly sliced scallion greens
Accompaniments: cooked white rice; hot pepper sauce 

Simmer shrimp shells and water, uncovered, in an 8-quart pot until
liquid is reduced to about 12 cups, 15 to 20 minutes, then pour
through a sieve set over a large bowl and discard shells.

Stir together oil and flour in a 10-inch heavy skillet (preferably
cast-iron) with a flat metal or wooden spatula, then cook over
moderately low heat (do not use a high-BTU burner), scraping back and
forth constantly (not stirring) until roux is the color of milk
chocolate, 30 to 45 minutes. (As roux cooks, it may be necessary to
lower the heat to prevent scorching.) Add onions, celery, and bell
pepper and cook, scraping back and forth occasionally, until onion is
softened, about 8 minutes.

Scrape roux mixture into cleaned 8-quart pot, then add shrimp stock and bring to a boil, stirring occasionally. Reduce heat, then add tasso, salt, and cayenne and simmer, uncovered, 30 minutes. Add okra and simmer until tender, 5 to 8 minutes. Stir in shrimp and simmer until just cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir in scallion greens and salt to taste.

Cooks' notes: Andouille or other smoked pork sausage can be
substituted for the tasso. Brown the sausage in a heavy skillet over
moderate heat, stirring occasionally, then transfer to paper towels to
drain. Stir into gumbo with scallions.  Gumbo improves in flavor if
made 1 day ahead without okra, shrimp, and scallion greens and cooled
completely, uncovered, then chilled, covered. Reheat, then proceed
with recipe, adding and cooking okra and shrimp.

*Available at cajungrocer.com. 

Makes 6 main-course servings.
Gourmet
June 2005

